## AN-EXPLAINABLE-COST-SENSITIVE-CREDIT-RISK-ASSESSMENT-MODEL
                                                             
                                                                                 
Loan default is the biggest threat in the financial industry. It has a significant impact on the economy as well. So, designing a robust credit assessment model is the need of time. However, with the accuracy of the model's performance, the lending firm is legally bound to explain the reason behind the assessment result to the borrower. But the real challenge in designing such a model is the imbalance of financial dataset and black-box nature of the machine learning model. So, in this study, the ensemble classifiers XGBoost, LightGBM, CatBoost, and Stacking model of all three boosting classifiers were implemented on the imbalanced Lending Club dataset, because ensemble classifiers are known to have lower variance and low bias benefit, so the performance of these classifiers was compared with each other along with the oversampled data created by using SMOTE and ADASYN techniques. All the classifiers' performance was evaluated by misclassification cost metrics type-I and type-II error. And the final result shows that XGBoost and Stacking classifiers with SMOTE technique achieved the highest performance score and lowest misclassification cost. Moreover, the cost-sensitive metrics AUC score, F1-score, G-mean were the highest compared to the previous study performed on the same dataset. And the black-box nature of the classifiers was handled using the explainable AI SHAP technique. The top 5 features with a high contribution to the prediction result were plotted using the SHAP plots with their contribution value, which can be easily interpreted.
